# Cancer Stage Diagnosis

This project analyzes breast cancer patient data. Several scripts are here to preprocess the datasets
(download links below), specifically to filter the data to only valid patients, their cancer stage, and all
relevant gene expressions recorded for each. More analysis is being done on this data.

## Datasets

The datasets being utilized are not present in this repo due to size. They must be downloaded or
generated by the R scripts, depending. Create a directory, `datasets`, and place inside it the
extracted dataset, found [here](http://www.cbioportal.org/study?id=brca_metabric#summary).


## Tasks

A brief overview of the distinct tasks undertaken for this project.

### Task 1: Preprocessing

Create new datasets using the BRCA dataset. There are two files of interest from the original dataset.
`data_clinical_sample.txt` associates various measurements concering the breast cancer diagnosis
of a given, named patient. `data_expression.txt` associates 24,375 gene expression
measurements to various named patients. Most of the patients in these are common, and thus the goal
is to merge patient genetic data with the corresponding patient's cancer stage extracted from
`data_clinical_sample.txt`.

The output should be 6 files. Each cancer stage (0 through 4) should get its own file, listing all the
patients and gene expression data of the corresponding stage only. One dataset containing all patients
should also be given. Each dataset produced should be as follows:

- Each row is a patient with genetic data and a valid stage
- Last column is the cancer stage
- Each column before the last is a measured gene expression


### Task 2: Classification

Attempt to derive a classification model, using the dataset produced in Task 1. The model will attempt
to classify the cancer stage (0 through 4) of 1403 unique patients, using 24,375 recorded gene
expressions.
